# How To Give A Talk
### By David L Stern

## Principles
If you have ever had to stand up and present ideas or data in front of an audience, then this blog is for you. 
In my opinion, the vast majority of science talks are terrible. I don’t mean that the science is bad or that the speakers are not trying to present their work clearly. I mean that information is often presented in a muddled fashion, with visual distractions that prevent the audience from understanding the point and—all too often—the talks are simply boring. They are, therefore, a poor mechanism for communicating information to the audience. The result is that during most scientific meetings, I observe that the majority of the audience has tuned out of many talks. They are checking their e-mail, surfing the web, or just staring blankly at the slides, not really absorbing the information. Often, these audience members blame themselves. They think they are not smart enough or sufficiently advanced in the field to understand the complex material presented in the talk. This represents a huge missed opportunity to communicate the excitement of science to a broad audience.
Over the past twenty years of giving scientific presentations I have learned, developed and simply stumbled upon a number of very simple principles that anybody can use to present a good talk. These principles did not come naturally to me. I was not born with a gift for giving a good talk. I worked hard at it over many years and now I find that audiences are usually deeply engaged with my talks. Some of the principles I employ are adopted from the brilliant insights of Edward Tufte, others from the approaches espoused by Alan Alda, and some I have developed myself. In this blog, I will share these principles with you. 
Let's start, though, with an overview of the fundamental problems with most science talks.
First, most speakers manage to drain their talks of all of their enthusiasm for their work.
Second, most speakers rely on jargon and fail to communicate in plain language.
Third, most speakers employ their audio-visual aids in ways that detract from their message and make it hard for observers to understand the essential points.
These are the most obvious problems with the vast majority of talks. There is another category of talk that I call the “take-no-prisoners” talk, where an obviously successful scientist presents everything they have done or everything they are doing in whatever time slot is available. Often, slides flash across the screen at—literally—an incomprehensible rate. Do these speakers really think they are teaching us anything? Are they trying to impress with volume (rather than quality)? Are they insecure that we won’t think they are productive? I have no understanding of the psychology that underlies this talk format, but in its own way, it is as useless as the boring talk.
So, you may ask, now that I have trashed most science talks, what makes a good talk?
First, it shouldbe engaging. Just as engaging as a fascinating discussion with a good friend. How do you make it fascinating? Well, here’s the big secret. Just treat the talk like you are having a fascinating discussion with a good friend! In essence, that is all there is to giving a good talk. In practice, there are many tricks you can use to reach this goal. With some fanfare, I will call these tricks "principles."
In this blog, over the coming months (and perhaps years) I will describe in some detail the mechanisms I use to, essentially, transform a talk into a conversation. 
Here's the plan. Periodically I will state one of my principles in this blog and provide an argument for why it seems to work and how you can implement it in your talks. Most of the principles I plan to discuss are intuitive, at least in retrospect, like: Speak Plainly and Slowly , and Be Yourself. Some of the unintuitive principles include: Don't Confuse a Talk with a Paper and Don't Tell the Audience Everything and Stop When You Are Done, Preferably Sooner. I very much doubt I will end up presenting the principles in a coherent order. I am writing this blog in what remains of my “free” time, so I will not expend extra effort at the moment to organize the content. 
Eventually, all of my principles will be enumerated on this blog, everyone will learn them, nobody will give a bad talk, and we will all live in peace and harmony. Well, at least I will have a much more pleasant time attending scientific conferences.
So, let's begin. If you are planning a talk for the first time, you might want to start with my general advice on talk structure: A Talk is not a Paper: The Structure of an Effective Talk. Otherwise, start with my most important principle: Don't Put Words on Slides. 

## Principle 1 - Don't Put Words On Slides
It may not seem intuitive, but including words on slides has a bigger detrimental effect on the quality of a talk than any other issue I will address. 
The slides in most science talks contain many words. This simple fact has many consequences, none positive. Most obviously, words on slides impel listeners to read the words on the slide. If you are talking while they are reading, then you generate cognitive dissonance that makes it difficult for the audience to understand either your spoken words or your written words. So, if you want your audience to read the words on a slide, then, presumably, you should shut up. But, I don’t recommend that. Instead, just cut all the words form your slides. 
This recommendation applies also to the dreaded “Title” slide. Title slides are a symptom of treating a talk like a paper (which I discuss further here). What, exactly, are you trying to communicate with a title slide? Who you are? They know that. What you will talk about? They very likely know that. Where you are from? Maybe that is unique information, but it is definitely not information that is pertinent to the science you are going to present. There is no information on any title slide that I have ever seen that improved communication. Instead, title slides often contain gratuitous images and information that distracts the audience from your critical first few sentences. So, with a title slide, you have very quickly ceded the first battle. You have let the audience not focus on your words and let their gaze wander over words (and sometimes images) that communicate very little information. Delete the title slide.
Now, onto the words on the remaining slides. These fall into two main categories. First, many talks include slides with bullet lists, or multiple full sentences. Sometimes these slides summarize the talk structure or sum up the conclusions. I have heard all the arguments about how these slides help guide the audience through the structure of your talk and clearly present the conclusions. There are at least two problems with these slides, however. The first is that speakers often read the lists or sentences. I believe this causes everyone’s comprehension of the subject to slow down. We read quickly, but we speak slowly. You therefore generate a conflict in the minds of the audience members by asking them to do both. Instead of asking them to think about an important issue, you are forcing them to artificially slow down their reading so that your words match their perception of the written words. So, not only have you probably not communicated your point to the majority of the audience, but you have insulted their intelligence to boot (they know how to read!). The second problem is that a well-organized talk really doesn’t require written signposts. These summaries are a crutch that contributes to making science talks clunky and boring.
In the second category of problematic-words-on-slides are titles for each slide. Many instructional materials on "how to give a good science talk" promote the use of titles on slides. The vast majority of science talks currently include slide titles. It seems that slide titles are currently the "industry standard" and accepted as an excellent way to communicate relevant information about the real information (the data) in the slide. We are all victims of this training—I was too, until recently—and I strongly encourage you to break the habit. Slide titles are a poor replacement for clearly stating the point with words. Often, titles purport to “describe” the content of the slide. About half the time these titles are cryptic, however, and simply describe the topic of the material presented in the slide. Since you are presumably talking about this topic, the title is redundant and the audience may have read the title and ignored you while you were speaking. The other half of the time, titles state the conclusion of the experiments presented in the slide. Some will read this conclusion and ignore what you say about the experiments, or worse, they will allow the title to color their interpretation of the data you present in the slide. Never write what you think the conclusion is. It is far better to guide the audience through the data—engage them with the material—and lead them to the conclusion. I explore this topic in further detail in Principle 3: Show Your Data. For now, just delete the titles.
Some words on slides are useful. Citations to previously published work are efficient ways to point the audience to some of the relevant literature. Keep it short, though. Usually the first author, date and journal title are sufficient to allow the audience to track down the reference. Other useful words include labels on figure axes and labels of graphical items. Avoid abbreviations. Use fully spelled out words whenever possible to simplify audience comprehension.
I commonly hear two reasons in support of putting words on slides, including titles and bullet lists. First, I have heard that many people recommend putting a title on the slide because it helps orient audience members who may have lost track of the thread of the talk. Hmm. Really? You are going to start with the assumption that the audience became distracted and lost your meaning? So, a title is really your confession that you are giving a boring talk and people are losing track? We can’t accept this assumption. Since we are going to help you give a non-boring talk, let’s start with the opposite assumption. People will be riveted by what you are saying. Nobody will lose track. And titles are therefore both redundant and distracting.
The second reason I hear is that words on slides help the speaker to remember what they intended to say. This excuse relates to many principles that I will discuss in the future. But let’s start with the basic issue of remembering what you want to say. All Powerpoint-like systems provide Presenter Notes that you can use to provide notes to yourself about what you want to say. This way, you can read what you want to say, but the audience has the impression that you are talking directly to them and not reading from your slides. This is an extremely helpful crutch as you learn to give better talks. Also, it is perfectly fine to write key words or sentences on index cards or a sheet of paper and look at your notes to remind yourself what you intended to say. Eventually, you will find you need these notes less and less. Later, we will discuss some of the other principles that are related to this same issue, like Practice, Practice, Practice and Don't Tell The Audience Everything. We will get to these principles in good time. For now, delete the words from your slides and put them in the Presenter Notes or write them down. You will discover that your audience will immediately start paying more attention to you, since they won’t spend any time reading your slides, which is exactly what we want them to do.
I can think of only one exception to the Don’t Put Words on Slides principle. The only time I have seen this done with any success was when an extremely engaging speaker read a quote from a book that was printed on the screen. We read along with him (silently) and it felt like a game. Even though we could have read ahead, we all read together as if we were a silent chorus. Like all successful exceptions, however, this works only when it is an exception! It breaks the rhythm of the presentation and invites the audience to participate as a community. 
So, if you can’t put words on slides, what are the slides for? Now we are getting somewhere! We will revisit the content of slides later. But, for now, just put information that is communicated better with images than with the spoken word. This is really the underlying reason for the Don't Put Words On Slides principle. In other words, use your speech to explain things that can be explained most clearly and efficiently with speech and use your slides to communicate things that cannot be explained efficiently with words. You could try to explain the Mona Lisa to someone with words, or you could just show them a picture. In contrast, when first introducing what you do, just say it. And when you say it, make absolutely sure that there is nothing visible that will distract the audience from your words. Then, they will understand you perfectly.
Some readers may have noticed that the Don't Put Words On Slides principle hews closely to principles espoused by Edward Tufte. See, for example, his take on the problems with PowerPoint. Also see Peter Norvig's brilliant parody of Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg Address employing PowerPoint.
That’s it for Principle 1. As I have intimated, we will return to the words on slides issue later. All of these principles are related, so I will often refer back to earlier principles and forward to principles that we have not yet discussed.

## Principle 2 - Use Black Slides
I once knew a famous developmental biologist who would sit in the front row at talks, bow his head low, and shield his eyes from the slides with his hands. He would listen intently to the description of the problem and the experimental approach and then cautiously peek up from above his hands to glance at the data when he thought the results were being shown. He would then quickly nestle his head back into his hands. He always asked the best questions after the talks. This biologists came up in the era before Powerpoint and I believe he was deeply distracted by all the graphics that are now displayed on slides. He wanted to understand everything the speaker said, so he did what he had to do to focus his attention on the speaker's words. 
The best way to convince the audience to listen to what you are saying is to eliminate any distractions. Remove extraneous visual stimuli and everyone in the audience will look at you and listen to what you are saying. Remember, they came to hear what you are saying and they are on your side, so don't be afraid to capture their full attention with your words. I admit that it can be somewhat unnerving to look at the audience and to realize that everyone is looking directly at you. A normal response is to want to look down or to look away. Resist this temptation! Look back at the audience. You will get used to this and you will soon learn that seeing everyone looking at you is the best sign that you are truly communicating with your audience. If you have lost your audience, you will see many heads not looking at you and not looking at your slides. Your "listeners" will be looking instead at whatever electronic device they brought with them. They are bored and they are not learning anything from your talk.
In the first entry, Principle 1, I provided the simplest way to focus the audience on your words and the relevant data, by removing words from slides. In later posts I will discuss other ideas to improve these data slides. But now I want to introduce you to my favorite "trick" for keeping the audience's attention. Insert black slides whenever you can explain things more clearly with words than you can with images. For example, I almost always start my talks with a black slide. When I start talking, everyone is looking at me and I know I have their attention from the beginning. I start by describing the problem. That is, I start, immediately, by talking about the science. Often I start with a very big picture view of the problem. Sometimes I start by discussing a commonplace observation that is related to the topic. Only rarely is an image required to introduce the broad view, but then, I quickly move to images that help me to explain the problem under study.
Later during the talk, I use black slides periodically as a visual pause. In these interludes, I review what I have presented so far. I try to use plain language to make sure that everyone in the room is following the major implications of each set of experiments or observations. Then, before I click to the next slide—which might show data, or a model, or some complex image which I will explain in detail—I say something along the lines of "Now, to test this idea we did experiment X" or "This raises an interesting issue, which is illustrated clearly in the following image." Then, I click to the next slide and we get back into the experiments.
These black slides also give me an opportunity to check on the state of the audience. Of course, when I present data slides, I usually point at specific items in the slides. This means I am not looking at the audience. With a black slide up, I can turn to the audience and discover if people are still interested. Are people looking at me or are most people looking at their iPhones? If they are looking at their iPhones, then I need to do something to recapture their attention. (I hope, though, that by the time I finish this blog you will have all the skills and tricks required to keep everyone's attention through the entire talk.) One simple trick to recapture the audience is, simply, to pause. Just stop talking for a few seconds. Everyone will look up to see what happened. Then, when everyone is looking at you, bring everyone back by summarizing what you have shown so far. 
It takes a little practice, but don't overstay your "visit" to the black slides. Don't launch into a huge monologue. The black slides provide a break from the visuals, and the visuals provide a break from the black slides. Everything in moderation.
Note, I said black slides, not blank slides. I have argued with some folks who feel that a blank white slide is just as effective as a blank black slide. They may be right, but I am not so sure. My impulse when I see a white slide is to look at the slide expecting something to appear on the slide soon. In contrast, my impulse when I see a black slide is to think "Oh, there is nothing to see here" and I automatically look at the speaker and listen to what they are saying. I would love to see a controlled study of the effect of white slides versus black slides on audience attention! For now, I encourage you to use black slides.
One technical note. If you do decide to start with a black slide, which I strongly encourage, be sure to alert the audio-visual experts who are helping you with your slides that your first slide is black. Otherwise, they may automatically start clicking through your talk looking for the "real" first slide. Needless to say, this will distract the audience from what you are saying!
